Replace CellAssign ridgeplots with density plots (#535)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf: templates/qc_report/celltypes_supplemental_report.rmd

```{r, eval = has_cellassign}
knitr::asis_output("
### `CellAssign` assessment

> To assess the quality of the `CellAsssign`-assigned cell types, we visualize the probability of each cell type annotation.
> `CellAssign` annotates cells by selecting the cell type with the highest probability among all cell types considered. 

Reviewer: I think we can get away without the first sentence? 
```suggestion
`CellAssign` annotates cells by selecting the cell type corresponding to the maximum probability among all cell types considered. 
```

Reviewer 2: Another thought. Do we want to have this in a similar format to the delta median score for SingleR. If that's the case, then we would want to have something like: 

```
To assess the quality of the `CellAsssign`-assigned cell types, we visualize the probability of each cell type annotation.

- `CellAssign` first calculates the probability of each cell being annotated as a cell type present in the reference.
-  The cell type with the highest probability is selected as the assigned cell type. 
- As with a typical probability, values range from 0-1 and values closer to 1 indicate more reliable(?) cell type annotations

You can interpret the plot as follows: 

... 
```

> The plot below shows probability distributions of all cells assigned to each cell type.

Reviewer: Pedantic, but this aren't really "probability distributions" in the standard sense, so I wanted to change the wording here. I added the word "maximum" to go with a wording change suggested above. 
```suggestion
The plot below shows the distribution of the maximum `CellAssign`-calculated probabilities for cells assigned to each cell type.
```

Author: > Pedantic, but this aren't really "probability distributions" in the standard sense, so I wanted to change the wording here. 

No you are definitely right to be pedantic here; I thought this too while writing but couldn't think of anything else at the time.

> Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual cell probabilities that comprise each distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual values that comprise each distribution.
```

> Note that no distrubution is shown for cell types with 3 or fewer labeled cells, but rug points are shown.

Reviewer: We should add a comment that we would expect reliable labels to have lots of scores near 1, or something like that.

")

# Determine height in inches for plot area and rug based on number of cell types
plot_height <- ceiling(length(unique(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation))/2.5)
rug_height <- plot_height / 175
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = plot_height, fig.width = 6}
ggplot(celltype_df) + 
  aes(x = cellassign_max_prediction) + 
  geom_density(

>     #aes(y = ..scaled..),

Reviewer 2: Do we need this?

    bw = 0.03, 
    fill = "grey65", 

>     size = 0.25) +

Reviewer: futureproofing
```suggestion
    linewidth = 0.25) +
```

>   geom_rug(
>     color = "blue", 
>     alpha = 0.8,
>     length = unit(rug_height, "in") 
>   ) + 
>   scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0,1)) +
>   scale_y_continuous(expand = c(0,0)) +

Reviewer: A couple thoughts on the plotting. My goal here is to move the rug _below_ the plotted points but still in the frame, by expanding the frame by a bit on the bottom. (Expanding the top by just a hair prevents clipping)

 Setting the length in plot units as `npc` keeps them mostly consistent with regard to the plot height with less math required. I think the method you have would be sensitive to the number of categories (unless you introduced that into the divisor for `rug_height` as well)

```suggestion
  geom_rug(
    color = "blue", 
    alpha = 0.8,
    length = unit(0.1, "npc") 
  ) + 
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0,1)) +
  # expand the bottom by 0.1 to accommodate the rug (and a bit on the top too)
  scale_y_continuous(expand = c(0, 0.1, 0, 0.01)) +
```

Reviewer: I don't know if we can dynamically scale the alpha values somehow. It is a bit strange when we have very large numbers of cells.

Reviewer: Update: Using multipliers rather than adding for the `expand` seems to work better for consistent rug plotting heights with varying scales.
```suggestion
  geom_rug(
    color = "blue", 
    alpha = 0.8,
    length = unit(0.1, "npc") 
  ) + 
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0,1)) +
  # expand the bottom by 0.1 to accommodate the rug (and a bit on the top too)
  scale_y_continuous(expand = c(0.11, 0, 0.01, 0)) +
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign}
knitr::asis_output("
### `CellAssign` assessment

> To assess the quality of the `CellAsssign`-assigned cell types, we visualize the probability of each cell type annotation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To assess the quality of the `CellAsssign`-assigned cell types, we look at the probability associated with the annotated cell type. 
```
Since we are only looking at the probability for the max cell type, how about something like this?

These probabilities are provided directly by `CellAssign`:

- `CellAssign` first calculates the probability of each cell being annotated as a cell type present in the reference.

> - `CellAssign` then annotates cells by selecting the cell type with the highest robability among all cell types considered. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `CellAssign` then annotates cells by selecting the cell type with the highest probability among all cell types considered. 
```

Author: Good find and good implicit point... spell check isn't going to catch text in chunks!

- These probabilities range from 0-1.
  - Values closer to 1 indicate that `CellAssign` is most confident in this cell type label compared to other cell types.
  - We therefore expect reliable labels to have values close to 1.

The plot below shows the distribution of `CellAssign`-calculated probabilities for the final cell type labels.

> Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' representing individual values that comprise each distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual values that comprise each distribution.
```

Note that no distrubution is shown for cell types with 3 or fewer labeled cells, but rug points are shown.
")

# Determine height in inches for plot area
plot_height <- ceiling(length(unique(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation))/2.5)
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = plot_height, fig.width = 6}
# add alpha indicator
celltype_df <- celltype_df |>
  dplyr::add_count(cellassign_celltype_annotation) |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    # if more cells, less opaque
    alpha = ifelse(
      n <= 100, 
      "dark", 
      "light"
    )
  )

ggplot(celltype_df) + 
  aes(x = cellassign_max_prediction) + 
  geom_density(
    bw = 0.03, 
    fill = "grey65", 
    linewidth = 0.25) +
  geom_rug(
    color = "blue", 

>     aes(alpha = alpha),

Reviewer: Why not set this directly?

```suggestion
    aes(alpha = ifelse(n < 100, 0.5, 1)),
```

Alternatively, somethine more continuous and aggressive like:
```
aes(alpha = max(0.1, 1 - 0.01 * n ) )
```
where alpha gets smaller as n rises to a minimum value  of 0.1 (play with the constants as needed for good results)

>     length = unit(0.1, "npc") 

Reviewer: A similar idea here: make the rug points taller if we have no density?
```suggestion
    length = unit(ifelse(n <= 3, 0.5, 0.1), "npc") 
```

Reviewer 2: +1 for this suggestion

Author: +2!

```{r, eval = has_cellassign}
knitr::asis_output("
### `CellAssign` assessment

To assess the quality of `CellAssign` cell type annotations, we look at the probability associated with the annotated cell type. 
These probabilities are provided directly by `CellAssign`:

> - `CellAssign` first calculates the probability of each cell being annotated as a cell type present in the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CellAssign` first calculates the probability of each cell being annotated as each cell type present in the reference.
```

- `CellAssign` then annotates cells by selecting the cell type with the highest probability among all cell types considered. 

> - These probabilities range from 0 to 1 with larger values indicating greater confidence in a given cell type label. We therefore expect reliable labels to have values close to 1.

Reviewer: Fixing my old suggestion to one sentence per line and adding a comma
```suggestion
- These probabilities range from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating greater confidence in a given cell type label.
We therefore expect reliable labels to have values close to 1.
```

The plot below shows the distribution of `CellAssign`-calculated probabilities for the final cell type labels.
Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual values that comprise each distribution.

Note that no distrubution is shown for cell types with 2 or fewer labeled cells, but rug points are shown.

> Rug points are also taller for any cell type label with 2 or fewer cells.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is true anymore? It looks like some of the other ones that have low numbers of cells are taller?

Reviewer: We can adjust this... right now it is 20 (line 440), but maybe we should drop it to 10, or back to 5?

Author: indeed!

Author: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/535/commits/394dcf8c1065f64c798c243b3a8fbfb07c59ee26 ✅

")

# Determine height in inches for plot area
plot_height <- ceiling(length(unique(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation))/2.5)
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = plot_height, fig.width = 6}
# define bandwidth for all calculations
density_bw <- 0.03

# find the maximum density across all distributions, and
#  save the maximum for determining geom_segment height
y_max <- celltype_df$cellassign_max_prediction |>
  split(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation) |>
  purrr::map_dbl(
    \(x) max(density(x, bw = density_bw)$y)
  ) |> 
  max()

# add count to celltype_df for setting alpha and yend values
celltype_df <- celltype_df |>
  dplyr::add_count(cellassign_celltype_annotation)

# make the plot!
ggplot(celltype_df) + 
  aes(x = cellassign_max_prediction) + 
  geom_density(
    bw = density_bw, 
    fill = "grey65", 
    linewidth = 0.25, 
    bounds = c(0, 1)
  ) + 
  geom_segment(
    aes(
      alpha = pmax(0.2, 1 - 0.01 * n),
      xend = cellassign_max_prediction,

>       yend = ifelse(n > 20, 0, y_max/2.5),

Reviewer: Probably worth commenting these lines (`alpha` and `yend`, in particular). I'd probably also move the `y = -Inf` in here, even though it doesn't vary. It just seems more logical inside the `aes`, grouped with `y_end`. But I don't feel very strongly.

Reviewer: Actually, don't ignore this one...

Author: huh, im surprised this worked to put `y=-Inf` inside of `aes()` without causing a legend bug!

The plot below shows the distribution of `CellAssign`-calculated probabilities for the final cell type labels.
Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual values that comprise each distribution.

Note that no distrubution is shown for cell types with 2 or fewer labeled cells, but rug points are shown.
")

# Determine height in inches for plot area
plot_height <- ceiling(length(unique(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation))/2.5)
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = plot_height, fig.width = 6}
# add count and alpha indicator
celltype_df <- celltype_df |>
  dplyr::add_count(cellassign_celltype_annotation) |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    # if more cells, less opaque
    alpha = ifelse(n <= 100, 1, 0.7)
  )

# make a small celltype_df for bigger rugs where needed
celltype_df_small <- celltype_df |>
  dplyr::filter(n < 2)

ggplot(celltype_df) + 
  aes(x = cellassign_max_prediction) + 
  geom_density(
    bw = 0.03, 
    fill = "grey65", 
    linewidth = 0.25
  ) +
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0,1)) +

>   # rug below density plots:
>   geom_rug(
>     color = "blue",
>     length = unit(0.1, "npc"),
>     aes(alpha = alpha)
>   ) +

Reviewer: I like the `geom_segment`, but I hate overplotting, so here is a consolidated version. Note that this also should allow you to remove the `scale_y_continuous(expand = c(0.1, 0.1))`

```suggestion
  # rug below density plots:
  geom_segment(
    aes = aes(
      xend = cellassign_max_prediction,
      y = -0.1,
      yend = ifelse(n < 5, 2, 0), # longer lines if we have few points 
      alpha = pmax(0.2, 1 - 0.01 * n) # trying this one again with the correct function; you don't have to use it!
    )
    color = "blue"
  ) +
```

I set it for longer lines for low counts, even if those _will_ have density plots on the assumption those density plots are not going to be very informative.

Reviewer: Noting we could do all of the `aes` setting except alpha in the opening `ggplot()` call if we want to. Probably makes sense to consolidate there.

Blue line segments shown as a 'rug' represent individual values that comprise each distribution.

Note that no distrubution is shown for cell types with 2 or fewer labeled cells, but rug points are shown.
Rug points are also taller for any cell type label with 2 or fewer cells.
")

# Determine height in inches for plot area
plot_height <- ceiling(length(unique(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation))/2.5)
```

```{r, eval = has_cellassign, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = plot_height, fig.width = 6}
# define bandwidth for all calculations
density_bw <- 0.03

# find the maximum density across all distributions, and
#  save the maximum for determining geom_segment height
y_max <- celltype_df |>
  dplyr::group_by(cellassign_celltype_annotation) |>
  dplyr::select(cellassign_celltype_annotation,
                cellassign_max_prediction) |>
  tidyr::nest() |>
  dplyr::ungroup() |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    density_max_y = purrr::map(
      data, 
      \(x) max(density(x$cellassign_max_prediction, bw = density_bw)$y
    ))
  ) |>
  tidyr::unnest(cols = c(density_max_y)) |>
  dplyr::summarize(y_max = max(density_max_y)) |>

>   dplyr::pull(y_max)

Reviewer: I like the idea of this, but it ended up really complex and hard to follow... A simpler version:
```
  y_max <- celltype_df$cellassign_max_prediction |>
    split(celltype_df$cellassign_celltype_annotation) |>
    purrr::map_dbl(
      \(x) max(density(x, bw = density_bw)$y)
    ) |> 
    max()
```
